---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Final Assignment

## Requirements

1) Your project needs to be dockerized with a **minimum** of two containers:
  - container 1: user interface (make something worth looking at)
  - container 2: A.I. logic
  - container x: ...

2) Use [GitHub](https://github.com/) and [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/) to autobuild your images

3) Epsagon Dashboard with significant indicators

4) Compress *(zip)* the entire project with your documentation *(pdf)* and upload it to **Toledo**

5) You upload your presentation the day before the `oral exam` on **Toledo** (more information later)

## Proposition

Before you can start with your final assignment you'll create a proposition.

A proposition consist of the following:
- Name of your project
- Motivation behind your project: so why did you pick this topic?
- Purpose of your project. (What does it do, what does it try to achieve)
- What type of A.I. algorithm(s) you're going to use.
- Which dataset(s) you're going to use.

For your final assignment you can choose between a `Practical`  or `Theoretical` application.

### Practical vs. Theoretical Application

#### Practical

With a practical application you are using `real` **and/or** `live` data in order to train your model / execute A.I. logic.
The main thing about a practical application is that it solves/predicts something that can be **used** and **implemented immediately**.

Some examples of practical applications are:
  - Market Stock Prediction (ex. Yahoo finance -> yfinance python package)
  - Weather prediction (bv. open-meteo.com)
  - Mail/SMS Spam detection (https://github.com/mohitgupta-omg/Kaggle-SMS-Spam-Collection-Dataset-/blob/master/spam.csv)
  - Etc.

#### Theoretical

With a theoretical application you can use `real` data, but you can **also** create your own `mock` data based on some **pre-defined statements** in order to train your model / execute A.I. logic.
The main thing about a theoretical application is that it solves/predicts something that could, with perhaps minimal configuration, be applied and used in a practical environment.
The big advantage of a Theoretical approach is that 'under the hood' it doesn't really differ from the practical approach only in data and outcome.

Some examples of theoretical application are:
  - Image recognition -> this is for example considered theoretical because for example training a model to recognize a 'vase' is the same as recognizing a 'lamp'.
  - Medical analysis
  - Game predictions
  - Our XOR project from Chapter 5.
  - Etc.

:::tip
You can use **Scrapy** to gather your own data.
:::

## Documentation & Presentation

Your documentation consists of:
- **[CODE]** comments in each function to describe its functionality

```python
def final_assignment(topic):
    """this function makes my assignment with a given topic."""
    print(f"this function makes my assignment concerning the topic: {topic}.")
```

- **[PDF]** **UML** schema's of your project classes
- **[PDF]** screenshots of your Epsagon dashboards.
- **[PDF]** global information of your project execution: how good is the model, how long did it train, etc.
  

## Deadline

Check out **Toledo**
