---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Final Assignment

## Documentation

The student investigates the **mini-max** algorithm and writes **an essay** about it.

This paper has:
- Information about the algorithm
- Pseudocode of the algorithm
- Properties of the algorithm such as complete/space/speed/memory/etc.
- Information about the implementation of the algorithm in your application:
  - Important objects/methods
  - How did you combine the application with the algorithm!

## Application

The student programs a [tic-tac-toe](/docs-intro-to-ai/Erasmus/Game) game that implements the mini-max algorithm.

This application has **THREE** versions:

**[VERSION 1]: ** A fully functional **console** tic-tac-toe written in **python**: <br />
No Artificial Intelligence -> But two player functionality with `WIN/LOSS` verification.

**[VERSION 2]: ** The console application with the **mini-max** algorithm implementation.

**[VERSION 3]: ** (version 1 + version 2 + GUI)
- Two player functionality
- A.I. functionality (mini-max)
- G.U.I. (Graphical User Interface) -> TKinter

## Deliverables

- name_surname_final_assignment.pdf
- name_surname_exam.pptx
- name_surname_version1.zip
- name_surname_version2.zip
- name_surname_version3.zip

## Exam

The student does a presentation about his final assignment. <br />
Duration: ca. 30min.

### PowerPoint 

1) Introduction <br />
2) Explanation Algorithm <br />
3) Implementation of the algorithm in Tic Tac Toe <br />
4) Demo

Duration: ca. 20min. <br />
Q&A: ca. 10min.